Good afternoon friends and welcome to this
joint press conference by the Notable External
Affairs Minister and Notable Minister of
State Independent Charge AYUSH on the
International Day of Yoga. We will begin the
programme with a very short film on the
International Day of Yoga
on 27 September
2014. India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi
proposed
[Music]
On 27 September
2014, India's Prime Minister Narendra
Modi proposed an International Day of Yoga at
the United Nations General Assembly.
[Music]
Today, I would like to
draw your attention to another subject. One we talk about
climate change. One we talk about
health. One we talk about nature. Now getting back to business
on that, I would like to say something special about this
subject. Yoga is our traditional and
able gift. Yoga is the balance of body and
mind, thought and action, achievement and self-
control and the coming together.  Being and
being healthy Yoga is a transformation of our
lifestyle and its awareness can help us
in our struggle against climate
[Music]
Change Yoga means unity and love
Practice yoga and let your life become more
colourful and meaningful
[Music] In
India, I should have
games, the yoga of all
[Music]
When the practice of yoga becomes just
wellness and the freedom to live happily
more and more people take up yoga around the world to see the changing of the world
Leading to more bones and harms the
planet Yoga practitioners become better people Be more
environmentally friendly and good
leaders This is the path of yoga and it can only be
good for the world Let us
work together to move
in this direction within International
Day of Yoga on 11 December
2014 The United Nations Pledged Resolution
Making  21st June The International Day of Yoga
177th Nation to spin the resolution a record
in UN history
[Music] May I now
invite Rebbe External Affairs
Minister Smt. Sushma Swaraj and Rebbe
Minister of State for AYUSH Shri Shripad
Nayak to come to the table. Please may I also
invite Dr. H.R. Nagendra the Chairman
of the Committee on AYUSH and Secretary AYUSH
Shri Niranjan Sanyal to take their places on
the table. We will begin
with an opening statement by
the Rebbe External Affairs Minister. She will be
speaking in Hindi but silent
interpretation has been provided so those of
you who need headsets please put them on.
This is our second meeting within the last 10 days. On the
first
day we discussed the achievements of the entire Ministry of External Affairs and
foreign policy but today
our question and answer session will be limited to International Yoga
Day. With me is
Brother Shripad Nayak, Minister of State for AYUSH with Independent Charge. On
my left is Shripad Nayak of S. Vyas
University.  Chancellor and Chairman of our committee
Dr. Nagendra ji and Secretary of AYUSH
Mr. Sanyal
ji, you will remember that in the last press conference
I had said a sentence
that in just 12 months India has
reached the pinnacle of the world where when India speaks the world
listens. The
declaration of 21st June as International Yoga Day is a direct proof of that.
You saw in the presentation that was made in front of you that on
27th September, while
addressing the General Assembly of the United Nations, the
Prime Minister expressed a desire, did
not put forward a proposal, expressed a desire
that 21st June should be declared as International Yoga Day.
He
said that Yoga is not just exercise
but it is also a medium to connect humans with nature
and
a medium to connect the living being with the Brahman
and that is why he appealed to the world to come forward
with Yoga and
declare June as International Yoga Day.
You also saw the second date, 11th December. On
11th December, with the sponsorship of 177 countries,
that is, 177 countries became co-sponsors,
that resolution was passed unanimously,
passed unopposed. If we consider this difference of days,  If
counted, it comes to 75 days. The
PM spoke on September 27
and the resolution was passed on December 11.
In just one day,
this resolution was passed with the co-sponsorship of 177 countries. It was
said in the presentation that this is a record.
How is this a record? The previous UN
record was
168 countries co-sponsored Nelson Mandela's resolution. Breaking that record,
177 countries co-
sponsored it. And as I said, this
resolution was passed unanimously, so 75 days and 177
countries is a record in itself. Now,
since this happened on India's initiative, it is very
important that India celebrates it with great grandeur
and on a very wide scale.
To achieve this goal,
two different departments were given the responsibility. The
Ministry of External Affairs was given the responsibility to
organize International Yoga Day abroad. The
Ministry of AYUSH was
given the main responsibility to
organize International Yoga Day in the country. Along with this, the
Ministry of Defence, Home Ministry, Human Resource Ministry, Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports and the
Ministry of Culture and Tourism were given the
supporting role.
I am very happy to tell you today
that this is a 177 country event because very
often this topic comes up that yoga is
associated with a particular religion.
I would like to tell you that among these 17 countries, there are
47 countries which are members of OIC, are
members of Organization of Islamic Countries.
47 Muslim countries are included in these 177 countries.
No one opposed our sponsorship,
but those who became our co-sponsors, who
sponsored us.
When we talked about making this program,
one idea also came to mind that
we should choose the same time all over the world
and at the same time, like it happens in Earth Day,
if it is 8 o'clock, then whenever it is 8 o'clock in any country,
this program should be held at that time.
But the suggestion came from the Muslim countries that
Ramadan will start,
you should allow us to do it after Roza Iftar.
So we
kept this in the program that there was no time
restriction at all, which country can
decide whenever it is convenient. So
they especially told us that we want to do it with great grandeur.
We have completely
accepted this suggestion, and
instead of asking all countries to do it at the same time, we have decided that
all countries should do it at their own convenience. I am
happy to tell you that there are a
total of 193 countries in the world.
We are conducting this program in 192 countries, including India, except Yemen.
We left out Yemen because
our embassy there has closed and
shifted to Djibouti. The situation in Yemen is similar to that
in other countries as well, but we are conducting it everywhere. The
only reason for not conducting it in Yemen is
that we do not have an embassy there.
So, this program will be conducted by the Ministry of External Affairs in 192 countries,
and we have missions there only in 121
other countries.
Despite this, to
truly call it world-class, we are conducting it
even in those places where we do not have missions.
I would like to especially thank the
yoga gurus
whose institutions are supporting us in organizing such a
large-scale program,
because we send very few yoga
teachers there on our own.  We were able to send 30 or 31
yoga gurus, but their centers are in
many places, some at 121 places, some at
151 places. They told us that they will
send their teachers and train people there.
But if you say
that it will be everywhere, then it will be everywhere. So,
through this press conference, I especially
want to express my gratitude to those yoga gurus who have supported
us in making this program a success.
After the foreign ones, as I said, the domestic event was
given to the Ministry of AYUSH.
Some other ministries are working with them.
We have planned some big programs in that. The
biggest program that AYUSH is organizing will be
on Rajpath, where 35,000 people will do
yoga together. We faced this limitation
due to space. We wanted to gather even 100,000 people here,
but because the space was not enough, all
three types of asanas are being done - standing, sitting,
and lying down. So, the
time required for the lying down asanas will require as many
mats to be laid there.
Even after occupying the entire space, the space was
not enough for many people. Therefore, the
number  Around 35,000 have been set up.
Apart from that, the Ministry of AYUSH is working in 650 districts through its own arrangements.
They have
engaged NGOs and they are going to every district. There are a
total of 676 districts in the country, but
AYUSH is touching 650 districts and organizing programs there through its own means. As
I said, other ministries are also
supporting them. State governments are
working at their level, district
collectors are also working at their level.
But I am most happy
that this program is not being done only at the government level.
This program is being done on a very large scale, so
our scale seems very small in front of that.
What yoga gurus and yoga institutes are doing, there are
astonishing figures. Baba
Ramdev himself is conducting 1100 programs abroad.
In England alone, he is
conducting 400 programs in the UK.
He has set a target of one lakh programs to reach every village here.
He wants to reach 10 crore people. On the
day of International Yoga Day,
information came from Sri Sri Ravi Shankar that
he has reached 5 crore people.  If you want to reach, then the
number in itself is called mind
boggling number, such number, programs of Jaggi Vasudev ji are being organized
outside and in Tamil Nadu as well
in the country, programs are being organized on such a large scale that
we could not have imagined and the enthusiasm that is
visible in the people is immense in itself,
but here one thing I would
like to say very specifically, there is no compulsion to participate in these programs,
people should
come voluntarily and participate voluntarily, this is our
main objective,
we have not brought anyone under compulsion, the
message has been given that people should come on
their own, should come voluntarily and only those who
come voluntarily will be able to become participants,
we are not bringing anyone under compulsion, third thing is that this
Yoga Institute and the government are definitely
organizing these programs, but the enthusiasm with which
people are making their own plans in the parks, the
public is making their own plans, it is
surprising to see that
these programs will be organized on such a large scale, along with this
our AYUSH has decided that one postage stamp
and two
coins, one coin of one rupee and one coin of one rupee  The
₹1000 coin will be commemorative and will
come into circulation. Similarly, the
Postal Department is issuing a postage stamp
and the RBI is minting coins. Along with this,
we have also secured celebrity endorsements.
In India, Amitabh Bachchan, Virat
Kohli, Suresh Kumar, Sushil Kumar have already done
endorsements. And our missions abroad have also secured
endorsements from celebrities from those countries.
After this, you will get a presentation on AYUSH
and another on MA, in which
you will also be able to see those celebrities.
But what I mean to say is
that the objective behind the initiative taken by India was to take the
world plagued by violence on the
path of peace.
Our slogan of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam is that the entire
world is like one family. It should be
connected through yoga. Yoga is a
huge soft power of India. Through that soft power, the
world should come together and the
increasing trend of violence should end through yoga.
I feel that the beginning that will take place on June 21st will be the beginning of
our  The fulfillment of protection
will begin and after that we will really be
able to take the world on the path of peace. I have only this to
say from my side. If my colleague, the
Minister of AYUSH, wants to add something, he
can add to it.
Once again, I welcome everyone.
Honorable Sushma ji has
placed before you a topic about the country and abroad.
This program is working to increase the pride of our country.
We are getting support from everywhere, be it
yoga gurus or NGOs or
yoga ashrams.
This is its main program, as
said in Delhi, its arrangements are also being done completely here.
A good and beautiful
program will be held in Delhi.
Honorable Prime Minister himself will be present in it
and will address those who come to do yoga. He will
address the entire country. At
least 35,000, more than 35,000 people will be present
here.
All the other preparations have been completed and I
feel that as
we have applied for a record in the Guinness Book,
this will also be a record
through this program. You all have been
supporting this for many days, you all are
promoting it and spreading it.  It is being done through this medium and even
after that programme is over, we will continue to get your support.
With this hope, I
thank you all once.
I thank the two ministers for my statement. I will now have to
present the
action plan by AYUSH and the action plan
by the Ministry of External Affairs. We will begin with
the action plan by AYUSH.
Notable External Affairs Minister Smt. Sushma
Swaraj ji, Notable Minister of State, Independent
of Ministry of Income, Shri Shripad Nayak ji.
Respected Dr.
Nagendra Secretary AYUSH, Shri San
ji. Respected Secretary from Minister
of Yoga, Shriya Yoga Institution and very dear
friends from media and press. My
great honour and privilege to present before you a very brief
presentation of the action plan on
the International Day of Yoga by a Notable
Minister. Just mention that the mandate of
celebrating International Day of Yoga has been
assigned to the Ministry of AYUSH by the Notable
Ministry in the Government of India.
A valid note was issued by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as it declares that 21st June is the Day
of Yoga on 11th December
2014 so this is the brief of lecture plan to be
Mass Yoga Nasta programme at Rajpat. The
two days International Conference at Vigyan
Bhawan will begin at 11 M.N. 21st June and on the evening
of
2nd the release of commote coins, postal
stamps and also through our Central
Council for Research Yoga Naturopathy. We have
roped in NGOs in 650 districts of the
country who have already begun training of
general public and also new Yuvak Kendra
members and respectable district members from
me and this one month training will continue on
21st June and on that day they will also
participate in early morning programme
from 7 to 75 M.N. which will also be followed by
seminars and some small functions and we have also
requested the State Government to
organize  Similar events and we are getting
good support from the states and
we have planned a very focused communication
strategy with the Ministry of IB also
the ministry through ICCR has
supported private yoga trainers to
support Indian missions
abroad coming to this mass yoga
demonstration at
Rajpath has been indicated by several ministers so this will be
basically we have developed a common
yoga protocol of 35 minutes in
detail consultation with all the important yoga
schools of the country yoga gurus teachers
special teachers have been consulted by our ministry
of yoga channel of the institute under ministry
of AYUSH so we have developed this common
protocol and this was finally vetted and
approved
by committee of yoga experts which was approved by
Dr Nagendra Chancellor of this university
and this will basically be played this 35
minutes yoga protocol will be performed by everyone in the
country as well as we have
shared this DVD  and booklet with the
Ministry of External Affairs
transmitted to various missions and it will be
practiced in various missions as mentioned by the
Rebbe Minister. The event at Rajpath
will be live telecast and it will be
webcast through NEC and Doordarshan and
people participants will be from NCC
Delhi Schools Yoga
Institutions
Mostly Am Yoga Baba Ramdev Panjali Yoga
Peeth Sri Sri Ravi Shankar Art of
Living Shasha Foundation Gayatri Parivar Our Union
of Yoga International
Nation A course are inviting
officers from various ministries, departments,
commissions and lls, our uniformed
forces and we have also
applied formally with the GIS world
record for category it is called largest
yoga
day class at single venue and with great deal
of accuracy during adjudication or
validation of participation all exercises
will be undertaken through one of our
appointed any
young a  Consultant so they will be
helping us for the direction of the
participants. The participants have been requested to make
similar presentations.
This is the graphic presentation graphic of
the project being
almost
348 DVDs along the stretch of Rajpath
from Rafi Mark Crossing up to sea level. The
total distance is about 1400 meters
and there will be the whole area will be
carpeted and 37000 mats will be
provided and also another mention there will be
International Conference on Yoga for
Holistic Health on 21st and 2nd June at Vigyan
Bhawan. In addition to three sessions there will be seven
technical sessions which have been
finalized again by the Expert Committee. The themes include
Traditional Basis of Yoga, Yoga in
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
Potential of Yoga, Yoga for Global Peace and
its Applications, Living Dishes of Yoga
and this session five and six will be held
in  People are currently attending and then the panel
discussion is Yoga for Holistic
Health and we have featured International
National Speakers and we are getting very good
response from all
countries and we have
received confirmation from 42
participants from 26
countries and there will be cultural evening
show of Yoga dance
and theatre performed by Yoga University
students as well as Sangeet Natak Academy
and there will be live
webcast and off course function will be
test strategy we have adopted for our this
program and instructions
DVD booklets we have
distributors
State Government and UT Government for
Yoga Institutions thousands of booklets
DVD both in English Hindi we have
distributors and interested we have some
organization who have approached us we have given them so they can some of them will be
participating at Rajpath but many of  They will also be doing the same thing
at their respectable
premises at their respectable
institutions then we have a mention we have
shared this DVD with the MA for use in
various missions
abroad and our MDN IY more institute
of Yoga is provide technical assistance
in terms of provide coaches trainers to
NCC, the Department of Personal
Training who are organizing this training, have got in these
Kalyan Kendras and
LSAs or 650 NGOs, 650 districts are
covered by NGOs, primary ng refu get l
and w are pravaya, final assist or so thed
train people for one month and
participate in our main program in
June media publicity done up very liberal
plan both electronic media print
media and the entire media activities not
only by Ministry of AYU but also
Ministry of Tourism Ministry of
HRD  It has been vetted by expert committee
so that the real sense of yoga is
transmitted to not only in India but also
the film made by M.A.T was also reviewed
by vetted by this committee by
Dr. Nagendra Singh
Apu Logo released on 29th
March. The film has been made by AYUSH
Ltd. It will be displayed on 21st
June and will put our booklet, DVD and our
National Health Portal link Internet Day of
Yoga there discussion form on my.gov.in and this
event will be event will be webcast
user ID will be provided by NP to
district so they can also upload
all the activities they are undertaking in
respect district and no celebrity
endorsement by mentioning Amita Bachchan ji, Virat
Kohli ji, Sushil Kumar ji, they have given their
clips and will be I think already
started, start today, tomorrow there will be
jingles to be run on DD and
AIR other Kolbong Ministry for  The
entire event Ministry of Defence is already there
11 more than 11 lakh NCC
cadets would be performing this common
yoga protocol through out the country the
training is already going on for last
about month and 5000 of cadets will be
part of our Rajput
content Ministry of Home Affairs is there
lakh forces will be performing in the
respectable feed formation and there is also
contributing content of 5000 from
various lakh
IDP CISF BSF CRPF are
contributing 5000 personnel Rajput it
Ministry of Human Resource Development is
serving this International Day of Yoga
and all the educational institutions have
requested the schools colleges
universities to bring this important
occasion by a noble minister mentioned it purely on
voluntary
basis and there will be 5000 school children
from Delhi the also being
coordinated by ministry of DFO
CBSE from Kendriya Vidyalayas from
Government of Delhi
Schools Ministry of Youth Affairs is
helping us in particular
mobilizing foreign participants and
apart from the members of Nero Yuvak
Kendra Sangathan Mahila Mandal. They will be
participating in the respectable district
and they are also undergoing training
organizations by our NGO and district. I
mention our Ministry of Culture is also
celebrating in a big way by doing
Yoga through Sangeet Natak Academy by
Janal Janal Culture Centre is celebrating the
event also. Committee Patanjali Memory and Work
and Interpretation Centre at Warsi is
proposing to publish. Ministry of
Tourism is also coming out with their brochures,
booklets,
magazines projecting India as a Yoga
destination across the world so the
publicity material has also been vetted by
Dr
Nagendra
Committee. Thank you very much apart from
you  All responsibilities I am also the
Chief Coordinator for the
International Day of Yoga so in that capacity now I will be
presenting to you the
Action Plan for International Day of Yoga by a
Mission
Abroad as no Minister had mentioned the
India Resolution declaring the International Day
of Yoga on June 21 was passed was sponsored
by a record 177 countries and all 193
member countries supported it this shows you the
break up of the various regions of the world which
sponsored the Indian Resolution we have been
working in coordination with all
our Missions and Posts abroad covering all
193 countries as a result of our efforts we have been able to succeed
in organizing
International Day of Yoga events in 192
countries the only country left as the Minister mentioned
is Yemen because of the very situation there  We have also
deputed a large number of
yoga instructors to our mission to assist them in
carrying out the International Day of Yoga
activities and following the External
Affairs Ministers meeting with the major
yoga organizations having an international
footprint they are assisting our mission in a big way so as
the minister mentions we are
deputing only 30 to 31 yoga
instructors the balance is being met
from the yoga
organization in terms of publicity more than
7000 copies of 10 coffee table books and more than
19000 copies of 57 reference books
exclusively on yoga have been from our mission and
more than 1000 copies of the Common Yoga
Protocol booklet have our mission along with
instructional DVDs which are
[music]
rai a lef jali
nide
[music] [music]
[music]
ar fam ng r fam d in Japanese and  The German
and prepared for documentaries Harmony with
Nature by Raja Chaudhary, Yoga Along to the
Source by Raja Chaudhary, Yoga and the Vision
of Life by Banoi K Bahl and History of
Yoga by Deepika Kothari and Ramji Om Cha have been made available to all.
Three folders of
photographic albums on Yoga have been
provided to all. The source material from
Mura Dasai, National
Institute of Yoga by Mr. Raja Chaudhary
and Mr. Banoi K
Bahl has been presented. The International Day of Yoga page on the
website is going to be launched and the launch will happen immediately after
this presentation
by the two
ministers. A large number of prepared
events have been held in various countries
as curtain raisers for the International Day of
Yoga. The main event on the 21st of June was
Yoga in the European Parliament and Yoga
at UNESCO in collaboration with Sri Sri
Ravi Shankar. There have been meetings with yoga clubs and
communities.  Organization yoga classes and
yoga have been
press conferences announcing events
we watch celebrations in the run up to the
festival in trid and to begin you can see the
picture they give from Australia and daily
updates and tips on social media as you can see
the line poster has been edited by mission in
milaw on the 21st of june there will be yoga
classes and meditations based on the
common yoga protocol articles will appear
in prominent media outlets there will be
release of the song in three countries at least
brazil hungary there will be
yoga workshops and other photographic activities
and film shows as well as competitions and
distribution of dvds and books just to give you a
taste of what the mission has been doing we are just
going to show you sampling
of the poster prepared by some of the mission so this is from
serbia on the way to
indonesia it has from san francisco with this will be led
by jai uttal grammy
nominated artist to hochi man city
from south
Africa All the way to Iceland
From the Gulf countries you see posters
now This is the poster from Dubai All the way to
China Central Asia This is the poster
from
Ravan and See The posters from Lisbon and
Monaco So all in all there will be 191
countries covered India is the one from 9 only
Yemen is missing and there will be a total of
251 cities covered in six continents So
from North America there will be 15
cities From South From South America there will be
20 from Europe there will be 63
from Asia there will be 75 from
Australia and Oceania there will be 23 and
55 from
Africa Just to give you the scale at which we are
organizing International Day of Yoga
events this gives you a listing of some of
the large scale events which our missions have
prepared and it is going to have more than
12000 people involved.
10000 Even Singapore will have
5000 Oslo will have 3000 Beijing will have
3000 Berlin will have 2000 Bogota will have
1500 Not only are the events being held
in the capital cities but in several countries there will be total
events across the country so those are some of the
countries there will be
multiple city venues USA China Australia Canada Germany UK Sri Lanka Thailand Vietnam Switzerland
UAE Afghanistan Bangladesh
Indonesia Rush
Nepal South Africa Japan Italy Myanmar and
Saudi
Arabia Minister Mention the celebrity
participation from LG We have the
Algerian Minister of Sports and Youth
Affairs Ho Chi Minh City We have a famous
singer Ning Fei Hung Bakk The daily Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister himself will be
leading the events In Copenhagen
We will have the Minister for Children and
Gender E Quality Manu  Sareen in Maldives Foreign
Minister Duniya Mamun will be there, also a
famous actor Ali Seezan in San
Francisco, Ja Uttal the Grammy nominee in
Sau Palo Maza Kohan a famous brilliant Jan Munk
in Sydney, it will be Brotherly and Vankar we
expect Bollywood stars Kapil Sharma and
Mika here you have Paras Taka Captain of the
National Cricket Team of Nepal endorsing Yoga
and in Malta we have lined up Moria
Delia famous actress and
singer finally Prince Raimal Ali will be the
patron of the Yoga celebrations in
Jordan The biggest flagship event of them all will be
at the United Nations because that was where it all began The
national External Affairs
Minister himself will be presiding
over that ceremony in the presence of Sri Sri
Ravi Shankar who will lead the Yoga
practice and we have also confirmed from
UN Secretary General Ban Ki Moon and President
of the 69th UN General Assembly Sam Qute The
Event will be broadcast live at Times
Square. Thank
you. You will now have the link to the International Day
of Yoga website.
So this, as you can see, is going to be our
cover page, which will also have details on the
International Day of Yoga celebrations abroad.
All these dots you see are actually
representing International Day of Yoga
events. So you click on any one of the dots.
Let's click for example, this little dot here, tiny dot,
Cook Islands. There you are.
What is the event on June 21st at what time?
See in two locations in Cook Islands.
You have the details of the events which are going to happen.
Let's click on a couple of
others. Okay, let's see, okay, let's see
Australia. There you are. What is going to happen in Italy? What is going to happen in Italy? What is going to happen in Italy? Who is the
person to contact in Sydney?
Or
you are in
Moscow? Lady
Walk? St. Petersburg.
So this  You can just click on interact map
or just click on any city and you will get
instant details of what is being held. What we are doing here is who the
person to
contact if you want to meet.
So with this we come to the end of the first part
of this press conference. Now we will be
happy to take questions from the Minister. Mention
please note this press conference is
exclusively for the International Day of Yoga.
So please
confined organization.
Name Devendra Parash from India TV. Yes,
you people are giving the message of youth on behalf of the government
but Robert D says that the way the
message is being given, the population of the country will
not accept it
because the message of youth is being given in an intimidating manner.
What are you calling intimidation?
I have already said that we are
not imposing any restrictions on participation, we are
not putting any compulsion in it. If we are making the
participation voluntary and willing, then
where did intimidation come from
Sushma?  Yes Madhurendra, I would like to know
your opinion regarding two statements from News Nation.
One is from your own MP
Adityanath, which means that those who do
not want to do yoga should take a kind of Jal
Samadhi. And the second statement has come from Baba Ramdev
that the act of Namaz is
actually also an act of Yoga.
What do you have to say on both? As far as Yogi Adityanath
's ban is concerned, I completely disagree with it.
This statement is unfortunate. As far as Baba
Ramdev is concerned, he is
trying to say that Yoga is
not related to any particular religion. The
same kind of actions that are done in Yoga are
also done while offering Namaz.
Okay Asif sahib,
my question to you is that Yoga is being
celebrated all over the world. And in the
language you have used,
Urdu is also a language. And the second thing is that has
our government or your department
contacted the Madrasas of India to participate in Yoga?
As far as foreign
languages ​​are concerned, Arabic is similar to Urdu, that is
why we have done it in Arabic.
You must have seen here that among the six
languages ​​of the UN, Arabic is also included.
We have done it in Arabic and as far as Madrasas are
concerned, we have told everyone, no one has been left out,
Madrasas have not been left out, we have
told everyone but it was said that you can
participate as per your wish. Sushma ji, Yogesh
Bhardwaj from Janjan Jagran Bhopal, this side, this
side, this side, yes, tell me ma'am, my question is that on this
proposal which was placed in the UN, is
Pakistan's name
included from India for support in that proposal and
secondly, there was a controversy in the Madhya Pradesh government regarding
Surya Namaskar, so
what is the plan of the Madhya Pradesh government for Surya Namaskar and Yoga on 21st June, yes,
as far as Pakistan is concerned, I
said that there was no opposition from anyone, there were
177 sponsors but there was no opposition from anyone,
that is why it was passed unanimously. As far as
Madhya Pradesh is concerned, the
entire plan made by Madhya Pradesh has been
made under the state government as well as by different yoga
institutes, which is
a common protocol which was mentioned
in both the presentations. I am  Let me
tell you that
a five member committee was formed under the chairmanship of Dr. Nagendra.
That five member committee made a common yoga protocol after talking to almost all the major yoga
institutes and all the major yoga
gurus,
but that common yoga
protocol is for missions sent abroad
and for government programs.
Rest of the yoga institutes or others can do anything,
they can do Surya Namaskar before or
after, but in the
common yoga protocol which was made after
everyone's advice, Surya
Namaskar was not included because they
wanted only very simple asanas in it
and wanted completely safe asanas which can be done by
anyone suffering from spondylitis
or back pain. Many asanas of Surya Namaskar are
prohibited for them and Surya Namaskar
in itself is a mixture of 12 asanas,
so they had kept a total of 15 asanas in it, so with
everyone's consent, only
Surya Namaskar was kept separately in that protocol, but there is
no restriction on doing Surya Namaskar. If the yoga
institutes want to do Surya Namaskar in the programs they will organize on their own, then they will do it.
Kash
ji,
Mike Sushma ji, as you told that
even 44 Muslim countries  I supported it,
but in our own country many fundamentalist
forces said that yoga is un-Islamic,
Surya Namaskar is against Islam.
With this mentality, do you think that there is an
attempt to politicize Yoga Day?
I told you in my initial statement
that perhaps they are saying this due to lack of information.
If they had known
that 47 Muslim countries, and also those countries
which are members of OIC, have given
sponsorship to it and not just said no but have become its co-
sponsors, then perhaps they would never have said this.
This is said due to lack of information.
I am from Anzar ula Munsif TV. My
question is that you said that due to Ramadan,
in many Islamic countries, sir,
what is the program for this in India after Roza Iftar, since a large population
of Muslims here will be
fasting from the 19th. Whoever wants to talk while crying can do so. There is
no restriction on anyone to
do it only at 8 in the morning. If the
people of Muslim community in India can do Roza after Iftar, then it is a
blatant lie, absolutely they can.
Or this 8 o'clock is only for government programs,
from 7:00 to 8:00 pm is only
for government programs, when do other institutions
want to do it, when do people want to do it in the park, there is
no restriction on that, so
after Roza Iftar, if people from Muslim community
want to do it, they can definitely do it.
Sushma ji, I am Shrikant Bhatia
from Samvad Sindhi Newspaper, Madam, this
kind of program that is being organized, as far as
I know, is probably the first such
program in India which the whole world is celebrating together and on one
day and at one time,
congratulations to the Government of India for that, or in the future,
Madam, do you think
that yoga should be a subject and children should have
regular yoga classes
for their health and for other things, do you
think that after this Yoga Day,
you should start some such course etc.
which the Ministry of Health should make a part of the curriculum,
yes, 21 June is just the beginning and on
this day when people will enjoy doing it,
they will also want to adopt it, but we are not
binding on any curriculum  We will not
impose it, the
curriculum should definitely be started so that children
learn it from the very first day, they should be interested in
both the things, their health should be
maintained well, a
feeling of inner peace should also develop in them, the biggest
thing that yoga does is to remove stress and
today if most of the children are suffering from something then
stress is a
big problem in itself and
yoga is the stress buster but even in those courses
you people will have the option that if you
want to do it then you can do it, if you do not want to do it then you should not impose it on
anyone, we will not impose it on anyone
Sushma ji, this is me Sachin Budhauliya
from Uni Varta, on this
side my question is that you are organizing such a big event, will the
ministers of other departments of Modi government also
participate in it because this has
not been seen anywhere, not in this, all the
ministers, all the ministers will participate in it and
most of the ministers will be in their constituencies,
some other ministers have
also been asked to stay at different places but most of the ministers
and MPs will stay in their respective areas,
all the ministers will participate
Tush ji Vijay Trivedi from News Nation
ji, as you mentioned that the 47 countries which are
members of OIC are Spencer  But if there is a
controversy over this in India, should the
reason be considered that the Indian
government has failed to
explain this to the people of India, who belong to the minority community,
or is the reason because of the
image of the Bharatiya Janata Party,
whatever happens, it seems that it is an anti-
minority action plan. This must be your
feeling. I don't think anyone
understands that everything done by the BJP is
anti-minority. As far as
explaining is concerned, I myself said that there is a
lack of information. It is important to tell this to the people
if they come to know that 47 Muslim
majority countries and the presentation you just
saw in which those countries were shown where this is happening
in many cities, because it is happening in 192 countries
but it is happening in 250 cities,
how many big Muslim countries are included in it,
UAE is there, Saudi Arabia is there,
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia,
all these are Muslim countries, the
program is not happening at one place, the program is happening at many places.
My question is to Shripad Nayak sahab,
as Sushma Swaraj ji said that due to
lack of information such things come to the fore.  It is
coming and this is not the intention of the government.
Shripad Nayak saheb, a
statement has come in your name that there are nine such yoga
methods
which are done during namaz, is the statement quoted by you about those nine methods
correct? Yes, I still agree with
this statement because when I requested during the time of namaz,
we
request the society that Baba, this
yoga is universal everywhere, it does not belong to any religion, any
caste, any party and everyone is
using it in their prayers
everywhere and from whatever
information I got, I got that
you can check these eight-nine methods anytime while doing namaz.
Yes,
Sushma ji, from today I have
learnt this from Prax Buffer Institute, Baba Ramdev, not from anyone else.
I have been doing it for 30 years. I am
speaking from Rajya Sabha TV. This is the
era of patents and
yoga is being done at the international level, at the global level.
What should we expect,
what benefit is India going to get from this, from this entire
process, as far as the
sages and saints of India are concerned, they  Whatever we
thought and did, we
put it in the public domain for the welfare of humanity. We
never put the intellectual property tag on such things
nor did we ever file a case for it. In
our country, all our sages and saints have
already put those things in the public domain
which are for the welfare of humanity. So, from our side,
Yoga is for the welfare of humanity.
India will never want to put the IPR tag on it.
I am Geeta Pandey from BBC. I want to ask how
much this event is meant to cost. We have a
budget for it. See, as far as foreign countries are
concerned, every mission of ours has its own
publicity budget and this is Chak India
Soft Power Campaign. If we are taking our soft power
forward, we will do it from our own budget.
As far as the national level
is concerned, I think no figure has been decided yet
because Sushma ji, Sushma ji,
Sanjay
Sharma madam from India News, Rahul Gandhi has said that to
divert the attention from the problems of the country,
Prime Minister Narendra Modi is making the entire country do
yoga and that
he is solving the problems through the salvation of yoga. He
talks about India. In India also, which  All these kinds of
violence, terror etc. are spreading, the biggest thing is that
yoga is its solution and it is not
only providing solution to India but to the whole world,
Madam German Press
Agency in the Western World Ga
oct fitness exercise it is not holistic
life approach does hurt you sometimes not doing anything done against that,
if someone wants to do yoga for health
then do it for health,
if he wants to do it in the name of holistic health exercise then do
it, everyone
gets benefit from it in different ways, so
if any country in the world does yoga as a holistic health exercise then
do it, Sushma ji I am Shobhana Jain, my
question is that our embassies are
sending invitations abroad, have they been sent to the Heads of States
as well, yes how many Heads of
States have given their approval, you will tell me some names,
some names, you just saw in the presentation
like it has been given to the Heads of States as well, it has gone to the
Heads of States as well, approval of some has come, approval of
some has not come, right now
invitations have been sent to everyone for the Heads of States,
Ma'am  Hein from
PTI report Pakistan rejected visa of
some
oct There is no problem, they
refused the visa, we made internal arrangements
but yoga will happen and we were
not relying only on this instructor for the
program, they refused the visa, we made
internal arrangements,
I am Santosh Thakur from Dainik Bhaskar, I
want to ask you two questions, firstly, have
you done any assessment of the business of yoga in the whole world,
it is said that about 35% of it is
with the Chinese people,
so after this Yoga Day,
how much control will the yoga gurus of India have on this business
or what will be India's share,
see firstly I have
objection on this subject of business and trade, yoga is
not a business for us and neither is yoga
a business for yoga gurus,
yoga is a mission for us, yoga is a
dedication, yoga is a surrender and as
I said earlier that our sages have
given yoga for the welfare of humanity, that is why
we never enter into its business and do
not enter into it thinking that China will make
more money  Is he earning or is someone else
earning, we do yoga for the welfare of mankind
Madam Pradeep Kumar I am from Samachar Post News
English Daily one thing is not clear to me,
the exercise I am doing, this thing is for the
betterment of the Indian and the betterment of the
global, I don't want to follow your
instructions, who is interested in this thing,
as far as making a protocol is concerned,
it has been made on the basis of Indian yoga of India
and not on the basis of yoga from anywhere else
because Patanjali is the guru of yoga
and we have made it on the basis of this Indian heritage of yoga, who is
interested in it, this is a
thing for the welfare of the people for the entire people and hence
we have made it for the welfare of the people of the entire world, yes
from the Asian a here ma'am this side my my question is you know you just mentioned that
the government had made some internal
arrangements
for the yoga day to celebrate yoga day in
Pakistan could you just be a bit more  Be
specific and give us some details what are
the Yoga Day arrangements in Islamabad and
other places in Pakistan and will it be just
the Indian High Commission there and will it be any
other agency and have you also
requested any assistance you got from there
we did
not make any request to the Pakistani authority because when
they did not allow our visa instructor to
go then we understood their mentality as
far as internal arrangements are concerned we got the
training done by our people who knew yoga there and it was done
in the embassy premises  We
will do yoga Sushma ji Hello, which way
Rajendra Vyas Manak from Rajasthani Magazine
Jodhpur, please ask me I would like to know from you
that if yoga is said in simple language then it is to
connect, please do it, so are you also doing
only the work of connecting,
what investment has been made in it, whom does your yoga
connect to whom, the soul to God, it is
said in the Gita that yoga means to connect, which
connects the soul to God, that is, to oneself, the
soul to the Supreme Soul, so
how will you describe it, when you
meditate after doing yoga, then the
connection starts with meditation and if you
do it daily, then as I said in the beginning that it
connects the human being to nature, it
connects the living being to the Brahma and when you are
in the meditative state, then that connection starts
as you progress, that
connection increases and one day the voice of Soham
comes, I am the same, I am the same, I am the same,
that is yoga, we have only
10 minutes left now, so
please make it happen, Sushma ji here, my
name is Rahul Mishra, I am asking that the one who is on
21st  Have Congress President
Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi also been
invited to it? Yes, they were invited
but the kind of statements they are making,
they might
not come. The lady,
please wait, scientific study, not only study, but
scientific study.
Ma'am, I am Priyamvada Sahay from Amar Ujala, right here in front of
you. Ha ha bo bo, I
want to know whether the PM will
only address the gathering on Rajpath or will he himself also do yoga
or not. There will be a dignified presence of the PM, there will be an
address, he will not do yoga himself.
Ma'am, Pradeep from Dainik Bhaskar, you are saying that there will be
35,000 people who will do yoga here
on Rajpath, but what is the total
estimate you are making in the overall world
or how many people are you expecting to do
yoga together? See, the exact
number will come later, but as I
said, yoga gurus have set very big targets.
Baba Ramdev is saying that he will reach 10 crore people
and will get them to do it. Sri
Sri Ravi Shankar is saying that he will
reach 5 crore people. Jaggi Vasudev is giving his
Swami  Chidanand is giving his, so
how many actually did it, we will know later,
ma'am,
first of all, your question is how many
instructors applied for visas and the reason given by which the
visas were rejected is this, it is because of
Pakistani diplomat
Mohammad Had sat for visa and it has been
rejected by the Indian government, see, the
visa that was rejected was only one, the
30 that we sent from here applied, all of them applied
and none of them were rejected, the
rest were tit for tat, only Pakistan can tell,
my Vikas told us about New York along with
Vishesh Shankar, the program that is being held in UN in New York, there are
many programs in New York as well, the program that is being held in UN will be
our major program, maybe
not in terms of numbers, but because
Sank did it, then we are doing it in their UN Plaza,
yes, at the same time ours is 8 o'clock or 7 o'clock,
ours is 8 o'clock in New York, it is 8 o'clock
there, it is 8 o'clock here  What time is it, Sushma
ji, I am Sushil Sharma speaking from Defence
Monitor Magazine. I am
speaking from Defence Monitor Magazine.
One thing has been observed in the army that
yoga has been
used very well to reduce the stress of the soldiers deployed at high altitudes and it has helped a lot.
Even on the fact side, the incidents of suicide have
also reduced. But will there be
any such scheme for the paramilitary forces, especially in Jammu and Kashmir or North East where they are deployed in distressed areas,
so that their stress can be reduced? I
myself called it a stress buster. Will it be a
government scheme? In this way, I am
saying the same thing that just like it was done there
for the army, similarly yoga should be done for the CRPF and even the
rest of the police personnel so that
their stress is reduced. We will do this. Last
two questions,
ok, a no,
ok. Hello, I am from ETV Gujarati.
What kind of response is coming from the non-BJP states in India, which are ruled
by the BJP?
What are the preparations of the people of that state for Yoga
International Day and what are the preparations in Gujarat and all the different
states, this is
not a program divided among parties because the
state governments belong to many parties and as far as
Ayush has told that they have reached 650 districts,
those 650 districts are inclusive of all the states,
so it includes all the states ruled by BJP and non-BJP, so the
preparations are very good
even in the non-BJP ruled states, last
question ma'am this is Sushmita from
Times of India, I just want to know here ma'am,
no, I just want to ask, this is the
first year and you are starting is there any
plan, the government to lay it and take it
forward in the coming years, how are you
going to plan it, or are you planning to
celebrate it in the similar fashion every time
and it will be better than before, so it means
when you celebrate any one day, International
Women's Day, do
n't we celebrate 8th March every year and every
year we try to be better than before, in the same way
International days are
celebrated every year, not just one year,
but based on this experience, we will
celebrate them in a better way. This
cool press briefing, please join us for some
refreshments. Thank you.